Add a new guide on how to understand and use the PEG parser (#734)
python/devguide: parser.rst

`parser generator <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compiler-compiler>`_. This
means that the way the parser is written is by feeding a description of the
Grammar of the Python language to a special program (the parser generator) which
outputs the parser. The way the Python language is changed is therefore by
modifiying the grammar file and developers rarely need to interact with the
parser generator itself other than use it to generate the parser.

How PEG Parsers Work
--------------------

.. _how-peg-parsers-work:

A PEG (Parsing Expression Grammar) grammar differs from a context-free grammar
(like the current one) in the fact that the way it is written more closely
reflects how the parser will operate when parsing it. The fundamental technical
difference is that the choice operator is ordered. This means that when writing::

  rule: A | B | C

a context-free-grammar parser (like an LL(1) parser) will generate constructions
that given an input string will *deduce* which alternative (``A``, ``B`` or ``C``)
must be expanded, while a PEG parser will check if the first alternative succeeds
and only if it fails, will it continue with the second or the third one in the

> order in which they are written. This makes the choice operator not commutative.

Reviewer: This is basically the same as order being important in ``and`` and ``or`` expressions and sequences of conditions in ``if`` and ``match`` statements.  Once I saw this, understanding the rest became easy.  So I think adding a sentence here would be useful.

Some theoretical computer scientists have advocated that multiple conditions be considered unordered like parsing patterns, so that multiple matches are possible, making a statement ambiguous.

Author: Yes and no. Grammars in general doesn't describe execution or matching. Indeed, EBNF grammars don't describe how to mach strings in the language but how to generate them. Algorithmic transformation is required to know how an EBNF grammar matches strings. PEG is unique here in the sense that th grammar is more related to the execution of the parser so what you mean is indeed closer, but care must be taken because it doesn't translate well to general grammars.

Unlike LL(1) parsers, PEG-based parsers cannot be ambiguous: if a string parses,
it has exactly one valid parse tree. This means that a PEG-based parser cannot
suffer from the ambiguity problems described in the previous section.

PEG parsers are usually constructed as a recursive descent parser in which every
rule in the grammar corresponds to a function in the program implementing the
parser and the parsing expression (the "expansion" or "definition" of the rule)
represents the "code" in said function. Each parsing function conceptually takes
an input string as its argument, and yields one of the following results:

* A "success" result. This result indicates that the expression can be parsed by
  that rule and the function may optionally move forward or consume one or more
  characters of the input string supplied to it.
* A "failure" result, in which case no input is consumed.

Notice that "failure" results do not imply that the program is incorrect or a
parsing failure because as the choice operator is ordered, a "failure" result

> merely indicates "try the following option". A direct implementation of a PEG

Reviewer: This seems directed at people who are so enmeshed in current parsers (as oppose to programming), that sequential rather thanparallel testing or matching seems weird rather than natural.

Author: In the word or grammars the "|" operator doesn't imply parallel or sequential testing because the grammar is *not* describing how strings in the language will be matched. What makes PEG unique is they the parser is describing how to generate a parser, so there is a much closer relationship between the grammar and "execution".

    be parsed, while context-free grammars are optimized to generate strings of the
    language they describe (in EBNF, to know if given string is in the language you need
    to do work to find out as is not imediately obvious from the grammar).

* Alternatives are ordered ( ``A | B`` is not the same as ``B | A`` ).
* If a rule returns a failure doesn't mean that the parsing has failed,
  it just means "try something else".
* By default PEG parsers run in exponential time and they are keep linear By
  using memoization.
* If parsing fails completely (no rule can suceed parsing all the input text), the
  PEG parser doesn't have a concept of "where the syntax error is".

Consecuences or the ordered choice operator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _consecuences-of-ordered-choice:

Although PEG may look like EBNF, but its meaning is quite different. The fact
that in PEG parsers alternatives are ordered (which is the core of how PEG
parsers work) has deep consecuences, other than removing ambiguity.

If a rule has two alternatives and the first of them suceeds, the second one is **not** attempted

> even if the caller rule failes to parse the rest of the input. This is often described that the parser

Reviewer: 'failes'
```suggestion
even if the caller rule fails to parse the rest of the input. This is often described that the parser
```

is "eager". To illustrate, this, consider the following two rules: ::

    first_rule:  ( 'a' | 'aa' ) 'a'
    second_rule: ('aa' | 'a'  ) 'a'

In a relgular EBNF grammar, both rules specify the language ``{aa, aaa}`` but
in PEG, one of these two rules accepts the string ``aaa`` but not the string
``aa``. The other does the opposite -- it accepts the string the string ``aa``

> but not the string ``aaa``. The reason is that the rule ``('a'/'aa')'a'`` does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but not the string ``aaa``. The rule ``('a'/'aa')'a'`` does
```

not accept ``aaa`` because ``'a'/'aa'`` consumes the first ``a``, letting the
final ``a`` in the rule consume the second, and leaving out the third ``a``.
As the rule has suceeded, no attempt is ever made to go back and let
``'a'/'aa'`` try the second alternative. The expression ``('aa'/'a')'a'`` does
not accept ``aa`` because ``'aa'/'a'`` accepts all of ``aa``, leaving nothing
for the final ``a``. Again, the second alternative of ``'aa'/'a'`` is not

> tried.

Reviewer: A subtle point here is that catenation does not distribute across choices.  I presume that ``'aaa'|'aa' *will* match ``aa`` because upon failure of ``aaa`` to match, ``aa`` will be tried, so that the pattern is *not* equal to ``('aa'/'a')'a'``.

Author: > so that the pattern is *not* equal to ``('aa'/'a')'a'``.

Indeed, that is the consequence of the parser being "eager" and the ordered alternative operator. The key here is that groping is its own rule (so when you write `('aa'/'a')'a'` you are writing `rule_1 'a'`. And the alternative eagerness is evaluated at the rule granularity

.. caution::

    The effects of ordered choice such as illustrated above, may be hidden by many levels of rules.

For this reason, avoid writing rules where an alternative is contained in the next one,
for example: ::

    my_rule:
        | 'if' expression 'then' block
        | 'if' expression 'then' block 'else' block

In this example, the second alternative will never be tried because the first one will
suceed first (even if the input string has a ``'else' block`` that follows). To correctly
write this rule you can simply alter the order: ::

    my_rule:

>         | 'if' expression 'then' block
>         | 'if' expression 'then' block 'else' block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        | 'if' expression 'then' block 'else' block
        | 'if' expression 'then' block
```

In this case, if the input string doesn't have an ``'else' block``, the first alternative
will fail and the second will be attempted without said part.

Syntax
------

The grammar consists of a sequence of rules of the form: ::

    rule_name: expression

Optionally, a type can be included right after the rule name, which
specifies the return type of the C or Python function corresponding to
the rule: ::

    rule_name[return_type]: expression

If the return type is omitted, then a ``void *`` is returned in C and an
``Any`` in Python.

Grammar Expressions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``# comment``
'''''''''''''

Python-style comments.

> 

Reviewer: Is '::' missing here?  I see it at the beginning of other grammar expressions.

Author: No, ```# comment``` is a section name,  `Python-style comments.` is the description of that section and ```e1 e2``` is another section name. Check the generated docs to see how it looks

``e1 e2``
'''''''''

Match e1, then match e2.

::

    rule_name: first_rule second_rule

> .. _e1-e2-1:

Reviewer: I don't understand this block.  It may be my fuzziness about .rst markup, but something seems extraneous or missing.  Same comment about other .. e1...(underscored) lines below.

Author: These are unused labels, I will remove them

``e1 | e2``
'''''''''''

Match e1 or e2.

The first alternative can also appear on the line after the rule name
for formatting purposes. In that case, a \| must be used before the
first alternative, like so:

::

    rule_name[return_type]:
        | first_alt
        | second_alt

``( e )``
'''''''''

Match e.

::

    rule_name: (e)

A slightly more complex and useful example includes using the grouping
operator together with the repeat operators:

::

    rule_name: (e1 e2)*

> 

Reviewer: The 'black' explanation sentence and '::' seem to be missing.

I stopped a little below here.  Will read more later.

Author: > The 'black' explanation sentence and '::' seem to be missing.

What do you mean with the `black` explanation?

Reviewer: The black type in the diff.

Author: I apologize, but unfortunately, I still don't know what "the black type" means. I tried to search for "black" but I cannot find anything.

outputs the parser. The way the Python language is changed is therefore by
modifying the grammar file and developers rarely need to interact with the
parser generator itself other than use it to generate the parser.

How PEG Parsers Work
--------------------

.. _how-peg-parsers-work:

A PEG (Parsing Expression Grammar) grammar (like the current one) differs from a
context-free grammar in that the way it is written more closely
reflects how the parser will operate when parsing it. The fundamental technical
difference is that the choice operator is ordered. This means that when writing::

  rule: A | B | C

a context-free-grammar parser (like an LL(1) parser) will generate constructions
that given an input string will *deduce* which alternative (``A``, ``B`` or ``C``)
must be expanded, while a PEG parser will check if the first alternative succeeds
and only if it fails, will it continue with the second or the third one in the
order in which they are written. This makes the choice operator not commutative.

Unlike LL(1) parsers, PEG-based parsers cannot be ambiguous: if a string parses,
it has exactly one valid parse tree. This means that a PEG-based parser cannot

> suffer from the ambiguity problems described in the previous section.

Author: Yeah, let me fix this sentence

PEG parsers are usually constructed as a recursive descent parser in which every
rule in the grammar corresponds to a function in the program implementing the
parser and the parsing expression (the "expansion" or "definition" of the rule)
represents the "code" in said function. Each parsing function conceptually takes
an input string as its argument, and yields one of the following results:

* A "success" result. This result indicates that the expression can be parsed by
  that rule and the function may optionally move forward or consume one or more
  characters of the input string supplied to it.
* A "failure" result, in which case no input is consumed.

Notice that "failure" results do not imply that the program is incorrect or a
parsing failure because as the choice operator is ordered, a "failure" result
merely indicates "try the following option". A direct implementation of a PEG
parser as a recursive descent parser will present exponential time performance in

> the worst case as compared with LL(1) parsers, because PEG parsers have infinite lookahead

Reviewer 2: I don't really understand what "as compared with LL(1) parsers" means here. What are we comparing? Is your intention to say that "exponential time is much worse than the typical implementation of an LL(1)"? If yes, it's not easy to get that here.

Author: I will remove the LL(1) parser reference

(this means that they can consider an arbitrary number of tokens before deciding
for a rule). Usually, PEG parsers avoid this exponential time complexity with a
technique called "packrat parsing" [1]_ which not only loads the entire
program in memory before parsing it but also allows the parser to backtrack
arbitrarily. This is made efficient by memoizing the rules already matched for
each position. The cost of the memoization cache is that the parser will naturally
use more memory than a simple LL(1) parser, which normally are table-based. 

Key ideas
~~~~~~~~~

.. important::
    Don't try to reason about a PEG grammar in the same way you would to with an EBNF
    or context free grammar. PEG is optimized to describe **how** input strings will
    be parsed, while context-free grammars are optimized to generate strings of the
    language they describe (in EBNF, to know if given string is in the language you need
    to do work to find out as is not immediately obvious from the grammar).

* Alternatives are ordered ( ``A | B`` is not the same as ``B | A`` ).
* If a rule returns a failure doesn't mean that the parsing has failed,
  it just means "try something else".

> * By default PEG parsers run in exponential time and they are keep linear By

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* By default PEG parsers run in exponential time, which can be optimized to linear by
```

  using memoization.

> * If parsing fails completely (no rule can succeed parsing all the input text), the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If parsing fails completely (no rule succeeds in parsing all the input text), the
```

  PEG parser doesn't have a concept of "where the syntax error is".

Consequences or the ordered choice operator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _consequences-of-ordered-choice:

Although PEG may look like EBNF, its meaning is quite different. The fact
that in PEG parsers alternatives are ordered (which is at the core of how PEG
parsers work) has deep consequences, other than removing ambiguity.

If a rule has two alternatives and the first of them succeeds, the second one is
**not** attempted even if the caller rule fails to parse the rest of the input.

> This is often described that the parser is "eager". To illustrate this, consider

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus the parser is said to be "eager". To illustrate this, consider
```

the following two rules (in these examples, a token is an individual character): ::

    first_rule:  ( 'a' | 'aa' ) 'a'
    second_rule: ('aa' | 'a'  ) 'a'

In a regular EBNF grammar, both rules specify the language ``{aa, aaa}`` but
in PEG, one of these two rules accepts the string ``aaa`` but not the string
``aa``. The other does the opposite -- it accepts the string the string ``aa``
but not the string ``aaa``. The rule ``('a'|'aa')'a'`` does
not accept ``aaa`` because ``'a'|'aa'`` consumes the first ``a``, letting the
final ``a`` in the rule consume the second, and leaving out the third ``a``.
As the rule has succeeded, no attempt is ever made to go back and let
``'a'|'aa'`` try the second alternative. The expression ``('aa'|'a')'a'`` does
not accept ``aa`` because ``'aa'|'a'`` accepts all of ``aa``, leaving nothing
for the final ``a``. Again, the second alternative of ``'aa'|'a'`` is not
tried.

.. caution::

    The effects of ordered choice such as illustrated above, may be hidden by many levels of rules.

> For this reason, avoid writing rules where an alternative is contained in the next one,

Reviewer 2: I think that the wording here should be stronger than just "avoid writing this". Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
For this reason, writing rules where an alternative is contained in the next one is in almost all cases a mistake,
```

::

    rule_name: [e]

A more useful example includes defining that a trailing comma is
optional:

::

    rule_name: e (',' e)* [',']

``e*``
''''''

Match zero or more occurrences of e.

::

    rule_name: (e1 e2)*

``e+``
''''''

Match one or more occurrences of e.

::

    rule_name: (e1 e2)+

``s.e+``
''''''''

Match one or more occurrences of e, separated by s. The generated parse
tree does not include the separator. This is otherwise identical to
``(e (s e)*)``.

::

    rule_name: ','.e+

``&e``
''''''

.. _peg-positive-lookahead:

Succeed if e can be parsed, without consuming any input.

``!e``
''''''

.. _peg-negative-lookahead:

Fail if e can be parsed, without consuming any input.

An example taken from the Python grammar specifies that a primary
consists of an atom, which is not followed by a ``.`` or a ``(`` or a
``[``:

::

    primary: atom !'.' !'(' !'['

``~``
''''''

Commit to the current alternative, even if it fails to parse.

::

    rule_name: '(' ~ some_rule ')' | some_alt

In this example, if a left parenthesis is parsed, then the other
alternative won’t be considered, even if some_rule or ‘)’ fail to be
parsed.

Left recursion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> PEG parsers normally do not support left recursion but Pegen implements a

Author: Hummmm, indeed, I will find out where to define it first

> PEG parsers normally do not support left recursion but Pegen implements a

Author: I removed the reference and substitute it for "CPython's parser generator" as we have a section about pegen later

    target_atoms[str]:
        | target_atom target_atoms { target_atom + " " + target_atoms }
        | target_atom { target_atom }

    target_atom[str]:
        | "{" ~ target_atoms "}" { "{" + target_atoms + "}" }
        | NAME { name.string }
        | NUMBER { number.string }
        | STRING { string.string }
        | "?" { "?" }
        | ":" { ":" }

As an illustrative example this simple grammar file allows directly
generating a full parser that can parse simple arithmetic expressions and that
returns a valid C-based Python AST:

::

    start[mod_ty]: a=expr_stmt* $ { Module(a, NULL, p->arena) }
    expr_stmt[stmt_ty]: a=expr NEWLINE { _Py_Expr(a, EXTRA) }
    expr[expr_ty]: 
        | l=expr '+' r=term { _Py_BinOp(l, Add, r, EXTRA) }
        | l=expr '-' r=term { _Py_BinOp(l, Sub, r, EXTRA) }
        | t=term { t }

    term[expr_ty]: 
        | l=term '*' r=factor { _Py_BinOp(l, Mult, r, EXTRA) }
        | l=term '/' r=factor { _Py_BinOp(l, Div, r, EXTRA) }
        | f=factor { f }

    factor[expr_ty]: 
        | '(' e=expr ')' { e }
        | a=atom { a }

    atom[expr_ty]: 
        | n=NAME { n }
        | n=NUMBER { n }

>         | s=STRING { s }

Reviewer 2: Let's remove the string here, since it doesn't appear in the Python example below and we're talking about simple arithmetic expressions.

Here ``EXTRA`` is a macro that expands to ``start_lineno, start_col_offset,
end_lineno, end_col_offset, p->arena``, those being variables automatically
injected by the parser; ``p`` points to an object that holds on to all state
for the parser.

A similar grammar written to target Python AST objects:

::

    start: expr NEWLINE? ENDMARKER { ast.Expression(expr) }
    expr: 
        | expr '+' term { ast.BinOp(expr, ast.Add(), term) }
        | expr '-' term { ast.BinOp(expr, ast.Sub(), term) }
        | term { term }

    term:
        | l=term '*' r=factor { ast.BinOp(l, ast.Mult(), r) }
        | term '/' factor { ast.BinOp(term, ast.Div(), factor) }
        | factor { factor }

    factor:
        | '(' expr ')' { expr }
        | atom { atom }

    atom: 
        | NAME { ast.Name(id=name.string, ctx=ast.Load()) }
        | NUMBER { ast.Constant(value=ast.literal_eval(number.string)) }

Pegen
-----

> Pegen is the parser generator used in CPython to produce the final PEG parser used by the interpreter. Is the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pegen is the parser generator used in CPython to produce the final PEG parser used by the interpreter. It is the
```

  (this means that there are no manually-written parsers). The meta-grammar is
  located at :file:`Tools/peg_generator/pegen/metagrammar.gram`.
* A generated parser (using the parser generator) that can directly produce C and Python AST objects. 

The source code for Pegen lives at :file:`Tools/peg_generator/pegen` but normally all typical commands to interact
with the parser generator are executed from the main makefile.

How to regenerate the parser
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once you have made the changes to the grammar files, to regenerate the ``C``
parser (the one used by the interpreter) just execute: ::

    make regen-pegen

using the :file:`Makefile` in the main directory.  If you are on Windows you can
use the Visual Studio project files to regenerate the parser or to execute: ::

    ./PCbuild/build.bat --regen

The generated parser file is located at :file:`Parser/parser.c`.

How to regenerate the meta-parser
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The meta-grammar (the grammar that describes the grammar for the grammar files
themselves) is located at :file:`Tools/peg_generator/pegen/metagrammar.gram`.

> Although is very unlikely that you ever need to modify it, if you make any modifications

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although it is very unlikely that you will ever need to modify it, if you make any modifications
```

    (like any rule in PEG).

Tokenization
~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is common among PEG parser frameworks that the parser does both the parsing and the tokenization,
but this does not happen in Pegen. The reason is that the Python language needs a custom tokenizer
to handle things like indentation boundaries, some special keywords like ``ASYNC`` and ``AWAIT``
(for compatibility purposes), backtracking errors (such as unclosed parenthesis), dealing with encoding,
interactive mode and much more. Some of these reasons are also there for historical purposes, and some
others are useful even today.

The list of tokens (all uppercase names in the grammar) that you can use can be found in the :file:`Grammar/Tokens`
file. If you change this file to add new tokens, make sure to regenerate the files by executing: ::

    make regen-token

If you are on Windows you can use the Visual Studio project files to regenerate the tokens or to execute: ::

    ./PCbuild/build.bat --regen

How tokens are generated and the rules governing this is completely up to the tokenizer (:file:`Parser/tokenizer.c`)
and the parser just receives tokens from it.

Memoization
~~~~~~~~~~~

> As described previously, to avoid exponential time complexity in the parser, memoization is used. In the Python

Reviewer 2: There seems to be something missing here?

Author: Thanks for the catch! "In the Python" should be removed.

> The C parser used by Python is highly optimized and memoization can expensive both in memory and time. Although

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The C parser used by Python is highly optimized and memoization can be expensive both in memory and time. Although
```

the memory cost is obvious (the parser needs memory for storing previous results in the cache) the execution time
cost comes for continuously checking if the given rule has a cache hit or not. In many situations, just parsing it
again can be faster. Pegen **disables memoization by default** except for rules with the special marker `memo` after
the rule name (and type, if present): ::

    rule_name[typr] (memo):
        ...

> Selectively turning on memoization for a handful of rules, the parser becomes faster and uses less memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By selectively turning on memoization for a handful of rules, the parser becomes faster and uses less memory.
```

    keywords are defined using **double quotes** (e.g. `"match"`).

There are two kinds of keywords allowed in pegen grammars: *hard* and *soft*
keywords. The difference between hard and soft keywords is that hard keywords
are always reserved words, even in positions where they make no sense (e.g. ``x = class + 1``),
while soft keywords only get a special meaning in context. Trying to use a hard
keyword as a variable will always fail:

.. code-block::

    >>> class = 3
    File "<stdin>", line 1
        class = 3
            ^
    SyntaxError: invalid syntax
    >>> foo(class=3)
    File "<stdin>", line 1
        foo(class=3)
            ^^^^^
    SyntaxError: invalid syntax

While soft keywords don't have this limitation if used in a context other when they
are defined as keywords:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> match = 45
    >>> foo(match="Yeah!")

The ``match`` and ``case`` keywords are soft keywords, so that they are recognized as
keywords at the beginning of a match statement or case block respectively, but are
allowed to be used in other places as variable or argument names.

You can get a list of all keywords defined in the grammar from Python:

.. code-block:: python

>     >>> keyword.kwlist

Reviewer 2: It might be obvious, but what about adding an import in this code-block?

Author: 👍

as well as soft keywords:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> keyword.softkwlist
    ['_', 'case', 'match']

.. caution::
    Soft keywords can be a bit challenging to manage as they can be accepted in
    places you don't intend to, given how the order alternatives behave in PEG
    parser (see :ref:`consequences of ordered choice section
    <consequences-of-ordered-choice>` for some background on this). In general,
    try to define them in places where there is not a lot of alternatives.

Error handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a pegen-generated parser detects that an exception is raised, it will
**automatically stop parsing**, no matter what the current state of the parser
is and it will unwind the stack and report the exception. This means that if a
:ref:`rule action <peg-grammar-actions>` raises an exception all parsing will
stop at that exact point. This is done to allow to correctly propagate any
exception set by calling Python C-API functions. This also includes :exc:`SyntaxError`
exceptions and this is the main mechanism the parser uses to report custom syntax
error messages.

.. note::
    Tokenizer errors are normally reported by raising exceptions but some special

>     tokenizer errors such as unclosed parenthesis will be reported only after themselves
>     parser finishes without returning anything.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    tokenizer errors such as unclosed parenthesis will be reported only after the
    parser finishes without returning anything.
```

How Syntax errors are reported
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As described previously in the :ref:`how PEG parsers work section
<how-peg-parsers-work>`, PEG parsers doesn't have a defined concept of where

> errors happened in the grammar, because if a rule fails that doesn't imply a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
errors happened in the grammar, because s rule failure doesn't imply a
```

parsing failure like in context free grammars. This means that some heuristic
has to be used to report generic errors unless something is explicitly declared

> as an error in there grammar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as an error in the grammar.
```

To report generic syntax errors, pegen uses a common heuristic in PEG parsers:
the location of *generic* syntax errors is reported in the furthest token that
was attempted to be matched but failed. This is only done if parsing has failed
(the parser returns ``NULL`` in C or ``None`` in Python) but no exception has
been raised.

.. caution::
    Positive and negative lookaheads will try to match a token so they will affect

>     the location of generic syntax errors. Use them carefully around at boundaries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    the location of generic syntax errors. Use them carefully at boundaries
```

    between rules.

As the Python grammar was primordially written as an LL(1) grammar, this heuristic

> has an extremely high success rate, but some of PEG features can have small effects,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
has an extremely high success rate, but some PEG features can have small effects,
```

such as :ref:`positive lookaheads <peg-positive-lookahead>` and
:ref:`negative lookaheads <peg-negative-lookahead>`.

To generate more precise syntax errors, custom rules are used. This is a common practice
also on context free grammars: the parser will try to accept some construct that is known
to be incorrect just to report a specific syntax error for that construct. In pegen grammars,

> these rules start with ``invalid_`` prefix. This is because trying to match this rules

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
these rules start with ``invalid_`` prefix. This is because trying to match these rules
```

normally has a performance impact on parsing (and can also affect the 'correct' grammar itself
in some tricky cases, depending on the ordering of the rules) so the generated parser acts in
two phases:

1. The first phase will try to parse the input stream without taking into account rules that
   start with the ``invalid_`` prefix. If the parsing succeeds it will return the generated AST
   and the second phase will not be attempted.

2. If the first phase failed, a second parsing attempt is done including the rules that start
   with an ``invalid_`` prefix. By design this attempt **cannot succeed** and is only executed

>    to give it a change to the invalid rules to detect specific situations where custom, more precise,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   to give to the invalid rules a chance to detect specific situations where custom, more precise,
```

   syntax errors can be raised. This also allows to trade a bit of performance for precision reporting

>    errors: given that we know that the input text is invalid, so there is no need to be fast because

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   errors: given that we know that the input text is invalid, there is no need to be fast because
```

   the interpreter is going to stop anyway.

.. important::
    When defining invalid rules:

    * Make sure all custom invalid rules raise :exc:`SyntaxError` exceptions (or a subclass if it).
    * Make sure **all** invalid rules start with the ``invalid_`` prefix to not
      impact performance of parsing correct Python code.
    * Make sure the parser doesn't behave differently for regular rules when you introduce invalid rules
      (see the :ref:`how PEG parsers work section <how-peg-parsers-work>` for more information).

You can find a collection of macros to raise specialized syntax errors in the
:file:`Parser/pegen.h` header file. These macros allow also to report ranges for
the custom errors that will be highlighted in the tracebacks that will be
displayed when the error is reported.

.. tip::
    A good way to test if an invalid rule will be triggered when you expect is to test if introducing

>     a syntax error **after** valid code triggers or not the rule. For example: ::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    a syntax error **after** valid code triggers the rule or not. For example: ::
```

        <valid python code> $ 42
    
    Should trigger the syntax error in the ``$`` character. If your rule is not correctly defined this
    won't happen. For example, if you try to define a rule to match Python 2 style ``print`` statements
    to make a better error message and you define it as: ::

        invalid_print: "print" expression
    

>     This will **seem** to work because the parser will correctly parse ``print(something)`` because is valid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This will **seem** to work because the parser will correctly parse ``print(something)`` because it is valid
```

    code and the second phase will never execute but if you try to parse ``print(something) $ 3`` the first pass
    of the parser will fail (because of the ``$``) and in the second phase, the rule will match the
    ``print(something)`` as ``print`` followed by the variable ``something`` between parenthesis and the error

>     will be reported there instead in the ``$`` character.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    will be reported there instead of the ``$`` character.
```

As a general rule, if an action spawns multiple lines or requires something more
complicated than a single expression of C code, is normally better to create a
custom helper in :file:`Parser/pegen.c` and expose it in the
:file:`Parser/pegen.h` header file so it can be used from the grammar.

If the parsing succeeds, the parser **must** return a **valid** AST object.

Testing
-------

There are three files that contain tests for the grammar and the parser:

* `Lib/test/test_grammar.py`.
* `Lib/test/test_syntax.py`.
* `Lib/test/test_exceptions.py`.

Check the contents of these files to know which is the best place to place new tests depending
on the nature of the new feature you are adding.

Tests for the parser generator itself can be found in the :file:`Lib/test/test_peg_generator` directory.

Debugging generated parsers
---------------------------

Making experiments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As the generated C parser is the one used by Python, this means that if something goes wrong when adding some
new rules to the grammar you cannot correctly compile and execute Python anymore. This makes it a bit challenging
to debug when something goes wrong, specially when making experiments.

> For this reason, is a good idea to experiment first by generating a Python parser. To do this, you can go to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this reason it is a good idea to experiment first by generating a Python parser. To do this, you can go to the
```

:file:`Tools/peg_generator/` directory on the CPython repository and manually call the parser generator by executing:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ python -m pegen python ~/github/pegen/data/expr.gram

This will generate a file called :file:`parse.py` in the same directory that you can use to parse some input:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ python parse.py file_with_source_code_to_test.py

As the generated :file:`parse.py` file is just Python code, you can modify it and add breakpoints to debug or
better understand some complex situations.

Verbose mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~

When Python is compiled in debug mode (by adding ``--with-pydebug`` when running the configure step in Linux or by
adding ``-d`` when calling the :file:`PCbuild/python.bat` script in Windows), is possible to activate a **very** verbose
mode in the generated parser. This is very useful to debug the generated parser and to understand how it works, but it
can be a bit hard to understand at first. 

.. note::

>     When activating verbose mode in the Python parser, is better to not use interactive mode as it can be much harder to
>     understand, as interactive mode involves some special steps compared with regular parsing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    When activating verbose mode in the Python parser, it is better to not use interactive mode as it can be much harder to
    understand, because interactive mode involves some special steps compared to regular parsing.
```

To activate verbose mode you can add the ``-d`` flag when executing Python:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ python -d file_to_test.py

This will print **a lot** of output to `stderr` so is probably better to dump it to a file for further analysis. The output
consist of trace lines with the following structure:

    <indentation> ('>'|'-'|'+'|'!') <rule_name>[<token_location>]: <alternative> ...

Every line is indented by a different amount (``<indentation>``) depending on how deep the call stack is. The next
character marks the type of the trace:

* ``>`` indicates that a rule is going to be attempted to be parsed.
* ``-`` indicates that a rule has failed to be parsed.
* ``+`` indicates that a rule has been parsed correctly.
* ``!`` indicates that an exception or an error has ben detected and the parser is unwinding.

The <token_location> part indicates the current index in the token array, the
<rule_name> part indicates what rule is being parsed and the <alternative> part

> indicates what alternative withing that rule is being attempted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
indicates what alternative within that rule is being attempted.
```

and only if it fails, will it continue with the second or the third one in the
order in which they are written. This makes the choice operator not commutative.

Unlike LL(1) parsers, PEG-based parsers cannot be ambiguous: if a string parses,
it has exactly one valid parse tree. This means that a PEG-based parser cannot
suffer from the ambiguity problems that can arise with LL(1) parsers and with
context-free grammars in general.

PEG parsers are usually constructed as a recursive descent parser in which every
rule in the grammar corresponds to a function in the program implementing the
parser and the parsing expression (the "expansion" or "definition" of the rule)
represents the "code" in said function. Each parsing function conceptually takes
an input string as its argument, and yields one of the following results:

* A "success" result. This result indicates that the expression can be parsed by
  that rule and the function may optionally move forward or consume one or more
  characters of the input string supplied to it.
* A "failure" result, in which case no input is consumed.

Notice that "failure" results do not imply that the program is incorrect or a

> parsing failure because as the choice operator is ordered, a "failure" result

Reviewer 2: > Notice that "failure" results do not imply that the program is incorrect or a
parsing failure or a parsing failure

This is a bit hard to read at first and needs a second pass to understand correctly, I feel. Maybe something like this would work a bit better?

Notice that "failure" results do not imply that the program is incorrect, nor do they necessarily mean that the parsing has failed. Since the choice operator is ordered, a failure very often merely indicates "try the following option".

Author: :+1: Yeah, I agree, this version reads better. Thanks!

merely indicates "try the following option". A direct implementation of a PEG
parser as a recursive descent parser will present exponential time performance

> the worst case, because PEG parsers have infinite lookahead (this means that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the worst case, because PEG parsers have infinite lookahead (this means that
```

they can consider an arbitrary number of tokens before deciding for a rule).
Usually, PEG parsers avoid this exponential time complexity with a technique called
"packrat parsing" [1]_ which not only loads the entire program in memory before
parsing it but also allows the parser to backtrack arbitrarily. This is made
efficient by memoizing the rules already matched for each position. The cost
of the memoization cache is that the parser will naturally use more memory
than a simple LL(1) parser, which normally are table-based. 

Key ideas
~~~~~~~~~

.. important::
    Don't try to reason about a PEG grammar in the same way you would to with an EBNF
    or context free grammar. PEG is optimized to describe **how** input strings will
    be parsed, while context-free grammars are optimized to generate strings of the

>     language they describe (in EBNF, to know if given string is in the language you need
>     to do work to find out as is not immediately obvious from the grammar).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    language they describe (in EBNF, to know if a given string is in the language, you need
    to do work to find out as it is not immediately obvious from the grammar).
```

* Alternatives are ordered ( ``A | B`` is not the same as ``B | A`` ).

> * If a rule returns a failure doesn't mean that the parsing has failed,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If a rule returns a failure, it doesn't mean that the parsing has failed,
```

If a rule has two alternatives and the first of them succeeds, the second one is
**not** attempted even if the caller rule fails to parse the rest of the input.
Thus the parser is said to be "eager". To illustrate this, consider
the following two rules (in these examples, a token is an individual character): ::

    first_rule:  ( 'a' | 'aa' ) 'a'
    second_rule: ('aa' | 'a'  ) 'a'

In a regular EBNF grammar, both rules specify the language ``{aa, aaa}`` but
in PEG, one of these two rules accepts the string ``aaa`` but not the string
``aa``. The other does the opposite -- it accepts the string the string ``aa``
but not the string ``aaa``. The rule ``('a'|'aa')'a'`` does
not accept ``aaa`` because ``'a'|'aa'`` consumes the first ``a``, letting the
final ``a`` in the rule consume the second, and leaving out the third ``a``.
As the rule has succeeded, no attempt is ever made to go back and let
``'a'|'aa'`` try the second alternative. The expression ``('aa'|'a')'a'`` does
not accept ``aa`` because ``'aa'|'a'`` accepts all of ``aa``, leaving nothing
for the final ``a``. Again, the second alternative of ``'aa'|'a'`` is not
tried.

.. caution::

>     The effects of ordered choice such as illustrated above, may be hidden by many levels of rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The effects of ordered choice, such as the ones illustrated above, may be hidden by many levels of rules.
```

For this reason, writing rules where an alternative is contained in the next one is in almost all cases a mistake,
for example: ::

    my_rule:
        | 'if' expression 'then' block
        | 'if' expression 'then' block 'else' block

In this example, the second alternative will never be tried because the first one will

> succeed first (even if the input string has a ``'else' block`` that follows). To correctly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
succeed first (even if the input string has an ``'else' block`` that follows). To correctly
```

piece of the parser generator that parses grammar files is bootstrapped from a
meta-grammar file with Python actions that generate the grammar tree as a result
of the parsing. 

In the specific case of the PEG grammar for Python, having actions allows
directly describing how the AST is composed in the grammar itself, making it
more clear and maintainable. This AST generation process is supported by the use
of some helper functions that factor out common AST object manipulations and
some other required operations that are not directly related to the grammar.

To indicate these actions each alternative can be followed by the action code
inside curly-braces, which specifies the return value of the alternative::

    rule_name[return_type]:
        | first_alt1 first_alt2 { first_alt1 }
        | second_alt1 second_alt2 { second_alt1 }

If the action is omitted and C code is being generated, then there are two
different possibilities:

1. If there’s a single name in the alternative, this gets returned.
2. If not, a dummy name object gets returned (this case should be avoided).

If the action is omitted and Python code is being generated, then a list

> with all the parsed expressions gets returned (this is meant for debugging).

Reviewer 2: I don't think that's true anymore. I think I remember Matthieu (I guess the state of the python generator in the pegen repo is going to be the standard for this document as well as far as the Python generator goes) changing this to most closely resemble what the C generator does: If there's a single name it gets returned, otherwise the list with all parsed expressions gets returned. Do you think we should change it?

Author: Yeah, let's change it to the current behaviour

Author: Also, I still want to keep the Python generator in the CPython repo updated with the one in pegen

and the parser just receives tokens from it.

Memoization
~~~~~~~~~~~

As described previously, to avoid exponential time complexity in the parser, memoization is used. 

The C parser used by Python is highly optimized and memoization can be expensive both in memory and time. Although
the memory cost is obvious (the parser needs memory for storing previous results in the cache) the execution time
cost comes for continuously checking if the given rule has a cache hit or not. In many situations, just parsing it
again can be faster. Pegen **disables memoization by default** except for rules with the special marker `memo` after
the rule name (and type, if present): ::

    rule_name[typr] (memo):
        ...

By selectively turning on memoization for a handful of rules, the parser becomes faster and uses less memory.

.. note::
    Left-recursive rules always use memoization, since the implementation of left-recursion depends on it.

To know if a new rule needs memoization or not, benchmarking is required
(comparing execution times and memory usage of some considerably big files with
and without memoization). There is a very simple instrumentation API available

> in the C generated parse code that allows to measure how much each rule uses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the generated C parse code that allows to measure how much each rule uses
```

* ``EXTRA``: This is a macro that expands to ``(_start_lineno, _start_col_offset, _end_lineno, _end_col_offset, p->arena)``,
  which is normally used to create AST nodes as almost all constructors need these attributes to be provided. All of the
  location variables are taken from the location information of the current token.

Hard and Soft keywords
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. note::
    In the grammar files, keywords are defined using **single quotes** (e.g. `'class'`) while soft
    keywords are defined using **double quotes** (e.g. `"match"`).

There are two kinds of keywords allowed in pegen grammars: *hard* and *soft*
keywords. The difference between hard and soft keywords is that hard keywords
are always reserved words, even in positions where they make no sense (e.g. ``x = class + 1``),
while soft keywords only get a special meaning in context. Trying to use a hard
keyword as a variable will always fail:

.. code-block::

    >>> class = 3
    File "<stdin>", line 1
        class = 3
            ^
    SyntaxError: invalid syntax
    >>> foo(class=3)
    File "<stdin>", line 1
        foo(class=3)
            ^^^^^
    SyntaxError: invalid syntax

> While soft keywords don't have this limitation if used in a context other when they
> are defined as keywords:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While soft keywords don't have this limitation if used in a context other the one where they
are defined as keywords:
```

.. code-block:: python

    >>> match = 45
    >>> foo(match="Yeah!")

The ``match`` and ``case`` keywords are soft keywords, so that they are recognized as
keywords at the beginning of a match statement or case block respectively, but are
allowed to be used in other places as variable or argument names.

You can get a list of all keywords defined in the grammar from Python:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import keyword
    >>> keyword.kwlist
    ['False', 'None', 'True', 'and', 'as', 'assert', 'async', 'await', 'break',
    'class', 'continue', 'def', 'del', 'elif', 'else', 'except', 'finally', 'for',
    'from', 'global', 'if', 'import', 'in', 'is', 'lambda', 'nonlocal', 'not', 'or',
    'pass', 'raise', 'return', 'try', 'while', 'with', 'yield']

as well as soft keywords:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import keyword
    >>> keyword.softkwlist
    ['_', 'case', 'match']

.. caution::
    Soft keywords can be a bit challenging to manage as they can be accepted in
    places you don't intend to, given how the order alternatives behave in PEG

>     parser (see :ref:`consequences of ordered choice section

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    parsers (see :ref:`consequences of ordered choice section
```

    <consequences-of-ordered-choice>` for some background on this). In general,
    try to define them in places where there is not a lot of alternatives.

Error handling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a pegen-generated parser detects that an exception is raised, it will
**automatically stop parsing**, no matter what the current state of the parser
is and it will unwind the stack and report the exception. This means that if a
:ref:`rule action <peg-grammar-actions>` raises an exception all parsing will
stop at that exact point. This is done to allow to correctly propagate any
exception set by calling Python C-API functions. This also includes :exc:`SyntaxError`
exceptions and this is the main mechanism the parser uses to report custom syntax
error messages.

.. note::
    Tokenizer errors are normally reported by raising exceptions but some special
    tokenizer errors such as unclosed parenthesis will be reported only after the
    parser finishes without returning anything.

How Syntax errors are reported
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As described previously in the :ref:`how PEG parsers work section

> <how-peg-parsers-work>`, PEG parsers doesn't have a defined concept of where

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<how-peg-parsers-work>`, PEG parsers don't have a defined concept of where
```

errors happened in the grammar, because a rule failure doesn't imply a
parsing failure like in context free grammars. This means that some heuristic
has to be used to report generic errors unless something is explicitly declared
as an error in the grammar.

To report generic syntax errors, pegen uses a common heuristic in PEG parsers:
the location of *generic* syntax errors is reported in the furthest token that
was attempted to be matched but failed. This is only done if parsing has failed
(the parser returns ``NULL`` in C or ``None`` in Python) but no exception has
been raised.

.. caution::
    Positive and negative lookaheads will try to match a token so they will affect
    the location of generic syntax errors. Use them carefully at boundaries
    between rules.

As the Python grammar was primordially written as an LL(1) grammar, this heuristic
has an extremely high success rate, but some PEG features can have small effects,
such as :ref:`positive lookaheads <peg-positive-lookahead>` and
:ref:`negative lookaheads <peg-negative-lookahead>`.

To generate more precise syntax errors, custom rules are used. This is a common practice

> also on context free grammars: the parser will try to accept some construct that is known

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
also in context free grammars: the parser will try to accept some construct that is known
```

to be incorrect just to report a specific syntax error for that construct. In pegen grammars,

> these rules start with ``invalid_`` prefix. This is because trying to match these rules

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
these rules start with the ``invalid_`` prefix. This is because trying to match these rules
```

normally has a performance impact on parsing (and can also affect the 'correct' grammar itself
in some tricky cases, depending on the ordering of the rules) so the generated parser acts in
two phases:

1. The first phase will try to parse the input stream without taking into account rules that
   start with the ``invalid_`` prefix. If the parsing succeeds it will return the generated AST
   and the second phase will not be attempted.

2. If the first phase failed, a second parsing attempt is done including the rules that start
   with an ``invalid_`` prefix. By design this attempt **cannot succeed** and is only executed
   to give to the invalid rules a chance to detect specific situations where custom, more precise,
   syntax errors can be raised. This also allows to trade a bit of performance for precision reporting
   errors: given that we know that the input text is invalid, there is no need to be fast because
   the interpreter is going to stop anyway.

.. important::
    When defining invalid rules:

>     * Make sure all custom invalid rules raise :exc:`SyntaxError` exceptions (or a subclass if it).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Make sure all custom invalid rules raise :exc:`SyntaxError` exceptions (or a subclass of it).
```

You can find a collection of macros to raise specialized syntax errors in the
:file:`Parser/pegen.h` header file. These macros allow also to report ranges for
the custom errors that will be highlighted in the tracebacks that will be
displayed when the error is reported.

.. tip::
    A good way to test if an invalid rule will be triggered when you expect is to test if introducing
    a syntax error **after** valid code triggers the rule or not. For example: ::

        <valid python code> $ 42
    
    Should trigger the syntax error in the ``$`` character. If your rule is not correctly defined this
    won't happen. For example, if you try to define a rule to match Python 2 style ``print`` statements
    to make a better error message and you define it as: ::

        invalid_print: "print" expression
    
    This will **seem** to work because the parser will correctly parse ``print(something)`` because it is valid
    code and the second phase will never execute but if you try to parse ``print(something) $ 3`` the first pass
    of the parser will fail (because of the ``$``) and in the second phase, the rule will match the

>     ``print(something)`` as ``print`` followed by the variable ``something`` between parenthesis and the error

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    ``print(something)`` as ``print`` followed by the variable ``something`` between parentheses and the error
```

    Python implementations to adapt the grammar to their own needs. 

As a general rule, if an action spawns multiple lines or requires something more
complicated than a single expression of C code, is normally better to create a
custom helper in :file:`Parser/pegen.c` and expose it in the
:file:`Parser/pegen.h` header file so it can be used from the grammar.

If the parsing succeeds, the parser **must** return a **valid** AST object.

Testing
-------

There are three files that contain tests for the grammar and the parser:

* `Lib/test/test_grammar.py`.
* `Lib/test/test_syntax.py`.
* `Lib/test/test_exceptions.py`.

Check the contents of these files to know which is the best place to place new tests depending
on the nature of the new feature you are adding.

Tests for the parser generator itself can be found in the :file:`Lib/test/test_peg_generator` directory.

Debugging generated parsers
---------------------------

Making experiments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As the generated C parser is the one used by Python, this means that if something goes wrong when adding some
new rules to the grammar you cannot correctly compile and execute Python anymore. This makes it a bit challenging

> to debug when something goes wrong, specially when making experiments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to debug when something goes wrong, especially when making experiments.
```

    $ python -m pegen python ~/github/pegen/data/expr.gram

This will generate a file called :file:`parse.py` in the same directory that you can use to parse some input:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ python parse.py file_with_source_code_to_test.py

As the generated :file:`parse.py` file is just Python code, you can modify it and add breakpoints to debug or
better understand some complex situations.

Verbose mode
~~~~~~~~~~~~

When Python is compiled in debug mode (by adding ``--with-pydebug`` when running the configure step in Linux or by
adding ``-d`` when calling the :file:`PCbuild/python.bat` script in Windows), is possible to activate a **very** verbose
mode in the generated parser. This is very useful to debug the generated parser and to understand how it works, but it
can be a bit hard to understand at first. 

.. note::

    When activating verbose mode in the Python parser, it is better to not use interactive mode as it can be much harder to
    understand, because interactive mode involves some special steps compared to regular parsing.

To activate verbose mode you can add the ``-d`` flag when executing Python:

.. code-block:: shell

    $ python -d file_to_test.py

> This will print **a lot** of output to `stderr` so is probably better to dump it to a file for further analysis. The output

Author: ```suggestion
This will print **a lot** of output to ``stderr`` so is probably better to dump it to a file for further analysis. The output
```

> consist of trace lines with the following structure:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
consists of trace lines with the following structure:
```

    <indentation> ('>'|'-'|'+'|'!') <rule_name>[<token_location>]: <alternative> ...

Every line is indented by a different amount (``<indentation>``) depending on how deep the call stack is. The next
character marks the type of the trace:

* ``>`` indicates that a rule is going to be attempted to be parsed.
* ``-`` indicates that a rule has failed to be parsed.
* ``+`` indicates that a rule has been parsed correctly.

> * ``!`` indicates that an exception or an error has ben detected and the parser is unwinding.

Reviewer: sp
```suggestion
* ``!`` indicates that an exception or an error has been detected and the parser is unwinding.
```

Tokenization
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Is common among PEG parser frameworks that the parser does both the parsing and the tokenization,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is common among PEG parser frameworks that the parser does both the parsing and the tokenization,
```
